CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# How to contribute to Hardhat for Visual Studio Code

This document contains details on how to collaborate and develop on the **Hardhat for Visual Studio Code** project.

- [How to contribute to Hardhat for Visual Studio Code](#how-to-contribute-to-hardhat-for-visual-studio-code)
  - [Project structure](#project-structure)
  - [Installing](#installing)
  - [Running Locally](#running-locally)
    - [1. Ensure you have a working build](#1-ensure-you-have-a-working-build)
    - [2. Open the repo in **vscode**](#2-open-the-repo-in-vscode)
    - [3. Run the extension in development](#3-run-the-extension-in-development)
    - [4. Debug](#4-debug)
  - [Testing](#testing)
    - [Unit](#unit)
    - [Integration](#integration)
  - [Code Formatting](#code-formatting)
  - [Linting](#linting)
  - [Changeset](#changeset)
  - [Packaging](#packaging)
    - [Extension README](#extension-readme)
  - [Publishing](#publishing)

## Project structure

**Hardhat for Visual Studio Code** is a typescript vscode extension and language server. The code is organised into:

- `./client` - the vscode extension, which mainly delegates onto the language server for functionality
- `./server` - the Hardhat language server, which supports the validation, quickfixes and other solidity language features of the extension
- `./test` - integration tests that combine both client and server
- `./snippets` - the code snippets the extension contributes on install
- `./syntaxes` - the solidity syntax highlighting rules

## Installing

[node](https://nodejs.org/en/) and [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/) are required for **Hardhat for Visual Studio Code** development.

To install the project's dependencies, run `yarn` in the root directory of the repository. This will install node dependencies at the top level, and in both the `./server` and `./client` package directories.

## Running Locally

### 1. Ensure you have a working build

From the root directory run a build:

```shell
yarn && yarn run build
```

### 2. Open the repo in **vscode**

VSCode is assumed as the development environment as it has inbuilt support for developing VSCode extesions. To open the repository in VSCode from the command line run:

```shell
code .
```

VSCode will suggest plugins that will help develop against the codebase in compliance with the styling and linting rules (see [extensions.json](./.vscode/extensions.json) for the list).

### 3. Run the extension in development

Within VSCode ppen the Run view (`Ctrl+Shift+D`), select `Launch Client`, and click the Play button (`F5`).

![image](docs/images/run_launch_client.png?raw=true)

This will open a new VS Code window with the title `[Extension Development Host]`. You can then open a folder that contains Solidity code and try out your changes.

You can also set breakpoints to debug your change.

If you make subsequent edits in the codebase, you can reload (`Ctrl+R`) the `[Extension Development Host]` instance of VS Code, which will load the new code.

### 4. Debug

Debugging the client code is as easy as debugging a normal extension. Set a breakpoint in the client code and debug the extension by running `Launch Client`.

Since the server is started by the `LanguageClient` running in the extension (client), we need to attach a debugger to the running server.

To do this, you need:

1. Go to the Run view and choose the `Attach to Server` configuration. \
   ![image](docs/images/run_attach_to_server.png?raw=true)
2. Add breakpoints as needed.
3. Before starting the `Attach to Server` configuration make sure that `Launch Client` is already started.
4. Start debugging (`F5`) or play button.
5. This will attach the debugger to the server and the breakpoints will be applied to them.

**Note**: Breakpoints need to be in the server directory because we attach to the server and only server breakpoints will be visible for us.

## Testing

**Hardhat for Visual Studio Code** has both unit and integration tests. Components of the server should be tested with unit tests, with a small set of integration tests providing confidence that component interactions work.

A complete test run involves both test suites and can be run, from repo root, with:

```shell
yarn test
```

### Unit

A **mocha** unit/component test suite covers the `./server`. The tests are kept separate from the src files in [./server/test](./server/test/). The tests can be run from the repo root with:

```shell
yarn test:unit
```

Or within the `./server` folder with:

```shell
yarn test
```

Code coverage is available with:

```shell
yarn test:coverage
```

### Integration

Integration tests that run a VSCode instance and exercise its workspace, files, Hardhat Client / Server, and VS Code commands. The integration tests are run using **mocha** and are contained in the [./test](./test) folder. The individual End-to-End tests are in the [./test/testdata/](./test/testdata/) directory.

To run the End-to-End tests from the command line, in the repo root run:

```shell
yarn test:integration
```

To run the End-to-End tests within VSCode, open the Run view (`Ctrl+Shift+D`), select `Language Server E2E Test`, and click the Play button (`F5`). \
 ![image](docs/images/run_e2e_test.png?raw=true)

## Code Formatting

We use Prettier to format all the code (and supporting json config files and markdown) without any special configuration. Whatever Prettier does is considered The Right Thing. Prettier is run in the CI, so run `yarn lint:fix` before pushing to auto-magically get into compliance.

## Linting

We also have eslint running on `./server`, `./client` and `./test`. It forbids some dangerous patterns.

The linter is always run in the CI, so make sure it passes before pushing code. You can use `yarn lint` and `yarn lint:fix` both at the root of the repository and within `./server` and `./client`.

## Changeset

We use [changset](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) to include text that explains to users (via the changelog) what features/fixes/changes have occurred.

Each PR should include a changeset to aid putting together a changelog during release.

To add a changeset to your PR, run:

```shell
yarn changeset add
```

## Packaging

VSCode extensions are distributed through a file format called `vsix` (really a zip file with a defined internal struture and metadata files). To build a `vsix` file for local testing or to upload to the [VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/vscode), run:

```shell
yarn package
```

This will clean the `/out` directories, then create bundled, minified versions of the client, and server files (index.js and helper.js) using [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/), and pull them together in the vsix file using `vsce`. The output vsix file will be in the project root.

The `vsix` will contain all files in the repo at the time of packaging, but this is reduced down to only the key files via our [.vscodeignore](./.vscodeignore) file.

### Extension README

The [VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/vscode) displays the `README.md` file as the landing page for the extension, the same readme is used in the extensions tab.

To separate out the repo readme from the marketing readme, we have two. The repo readme is our actual [README.md](./README.md), while the extension readme is contained in [EXTENSION.md](./EXTENSION.md). During packaging [EXTENSION.md](./EXTENSION.md) is swapped in for [README.md](./README.md). Changes to test displayed on the extensions landing page/extension tab should be made to [EXTENSION.md](./EXTENSION.md).

## Publishing

The extension is published via the [VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/vscode), see [publish-extension.md](./docs/publish-extension.md) for detailed instructions in making a release.

Commit message:

docs: update way extension is referred to
Remove the out of date internal docs references to **Hardhat for
VSCode**. The extension is now generally Solidity focused which is
reflected in our name change to **Solidity**. As there are other
**Solidity** extensions we disambiguate in our marketplace facing
documentation with **Solidity by Nomic Foundation**. Outside of the
marketplace we use **Solidity for VS Code by Nomic Foundation** to give
context that it is the vscode extension that we are talking about.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# How to contribute to Solidity for VS Code by Nomic Foundation

This document contains details on how to collaborate and develop on the **Solidity for VS Code by Nomic Foundation** project.

- [How to contribute to Solidity for VS Code by Nomic Foundation](#how-to-contribute-to-solidity-for-vs-code-by-nomic-foundation)
  - [Project structure](#project-structure)
  - [Installing](#installing)
  - [Running Locally](#running-locally)
    - [1. Ensure you have a working build](#1-ensure-you-have-a-working-build)
    - [2. Open the repo in **vscode**](#2-open-the-repo-in-vscode)
    - [3. Run the extension in development](#3-run-the-extension-in-development)
    - [4. Debug](#4-debug)
  - [Testing](#testing)
    - [Unit](#unit)
    - [Integration](#integration)
  - [Code Formatting](#code-formatting)
  - [Linting](#linting)
  - [Changeset](#changeset)
  - [Packaging](#packaging)
    - [Extension README](#extension-readme)
  - [Publishing](#publishing)

## Project structure

The vscode extension and language server are written in typescript. The code is organised into:

- `./client` - the vscode extension, which mainly delegates onto the language server for functionality
- `./server` - the Hardhat language server, which supports the validation, quickfixes and other solidity language features of the extension
- `./test` - integration tests that combine both client and server
- `./snippets` - the code snippets the extension contributes on install
- `./syntaxes` - the solidity syntax highlighting rules

## Installing

[node](https://nodejs.org/en/) and [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/) are required for development.

To install the project's dependencies, run `yarn` in the root directory of the repository. This will install node dependencies at the top level, and in both the `./server` and `./client` package directories.

## Running Locally

### 1. Ensure you have a working build

From the root directory run a build:

```shell
yarn && yarn run build
```

### 2. Open the repo in **vscode**

VSCode is assumed as the development environment as it has inbuilt support for developing VSCode extesions. To open the repository in VSCode from the command line run:

```shell
code .
```

VSCode will suggest plugins that will help develop against the codebase in compliance with the styling and linting rules (see [extensions.json](./.vscode/extensions.json) for the list).

### 3. Run the extension in development

Within VSCode ppen the Run view (`Ctrl+Shift+D`), select `Launch Client`, and click the Play button (`F5`).

![image](docs/images/run_launch_client.png?raw=true)

This will open a new VS Code window with the title `[Extension Development Host]`. You can then open a folder that contains Solidity code and try out your changes.

You can also set breakpoints to debug your change.

If you make subsequent edits in the codebase, you can reload (`Ctrl+R`) the `[Extension Development Host]` instance of VS Code, which will load the new code.

### 4. Debug

Debugging the client code is as easy as debugging a normal extension. Set a breakpoint in the client code and debug the extension by running `Launch Client`.

Since the server is started by the `LanguageClient` running in the extension (client), we need to attach a debugger to the running server.

To do this, you need:

1. Go to the Run view and choose the `Attach to Server` configuration. \
   ![image](docs/images/run_attach_to_server.png?raw=true)
2. Add breakpoints as needed.
3. Before starting the `Attach to Server` configuration make sure that `Launch Client` is already started.
4. Start debugging (`F5`) or play button.
5. This will attach the debugger to the server and the breakpoints will be applied to them.

**Note**: Breakpoints need to be in the server directory because we attach to the server and only server breakpoints will be visible for us.

## Testing

The project has both unit and integration tests. Components of the server should be tested with unit tests, with a small set of integration tests providing confidence that component interactions work.

A complete test run involves both test suites and can be run, from repo root, with:

```shell
yarn test
```

### Unit

A **mocha** unit/component test suite covers the `./server`. The tests are kept separate from the src files in [./server/test](./server/test/). The tests can be run from the repo root with:

```shell
yarn test:unit
```

Or within the `./server` folder with:

```shell
yarn test
```

Code coverage is available with:

```shell
yarn test:coverage
```

### Integration

Integration tests that run a VSCode instance and exercise its workspace, files, Hardhat Client / Server, and VS Code commands. The integration tests are run using **mocha** and are contained in the [./test](./test) folder. The individual End-to-End tests are in the [./test/testdata/](./test/testdata/) directory.

To run the End-to-End tests from the command line, in the repo root run:

```shell
yarn test:integration
```

To run the End-to-End tests within VSCode, open the Run view (`Ctrl+Shift+D`), select `Language Server E2E Test`, and click the Play button (`F5`). \
 ![image](docs/images/run_e2e_test.png?raw=true)

## Code Formatting

We use Prettier to format all the code (and supporting json config files and markdown) without any special configuration. Whatever Prettier does is considered The Right Thing. Prettier is run in the CI, so run `yarn lint:fix` before pushing to auto-magically get into compliance.

## Linting

We also have eslint running on `./server`, `./client` and `./test`. It forbids some dangerous patterns.

The linter is always run in the CI, so make sure it passes before pushing code. You can use `yarn lint` and `yarn lint:fix` both at the root of the repository and within `./server` and `./client`.

## Changeset

We use [changset](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) to include text that explains to users (via the changelog) what features/fixes/changes have occurred.

Each PR should include a changeset to aid putting together a changelog during release.

To add a changeset to your PR, run:

```shell
yarn changeset add
```

## Packaging

VSCode extensions are distributed through a file format called `vsix` (really a zip file with a defined internal struture and metadata files). To build a `vsix` file for local testing or to upload to the [VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/vscode), run:

```shell
yarn package
```

This will clean the `/out` directories, then create bundled, minified versions of the client, and server files (index.js and helper.js) using [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/), and pull them together in the vsix file using `vsce`. The output vsix file will be in the project root.

The `vsix` will contain all files in the repo at the time of packaging, but this is reduced down to only the key files via our [.vscodeignore](./.vscodeignore) file.

### Extension README

The [VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/vscode) displays the `README.md` file as the landing page for the extension, the same readme is used in the extensions tab.

To separate out the repo readme from the marketing readme, we have two. The repo readme is our actual [README.md](./README.md), while the extension readme is contained in [EXTENSION.md](./EXTENSION.md). During packaging [EXTENSION.md](./EXTENSION.md) is swapped in for [README.md](./README.md). Changes to test displayed on the extensions landing page/extension tab should be made to [EXTENSION.md](./EXTENSION.md).

## Publishing

The extension is published via the [VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/vscode), see [publish-extension.md](./docs/publish-extension.md) for detailed instructions in making a release.
